Overhaul SOS introduction (#524)
apple/swift-org-website: documentation/server/index.md

title: Swift on Server
---

## Overview

> [**Swift**](https://www.swift.org) is a general-purpose programming language built using a modern approach to safety, performance, and software design patterns. Originally developed by Apple for building iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS applications, Swift’s project goal is to create the best available language for uses ranging from systems programming to mobile and desktop apps, scaling up to highly distributed cloud services. Swift’s rich ecosystem of libraries allows services to be developed and deployed on Linux or MacOS. Most importantly, Swift is designed to make writing and maintaining correct programs simple for developers.

Reviewer: Nit
```suggestion
[**Swift**](https://www.swift.org) is a general-purpose programming language built using a modern approach to safety, performance, and software design patterns. Originally developed by Apple for building iOS, macOS, watchOS, and tvOS applications, Swift’s project goal is to create the best available language for uses ranging from systems programming to mobile and desktop apps, scaling up to highly distributed cloud services. Swift’s rich ecosystem of libraries allows services to be developed and deployed on Linux or macOS. Most importantly, Swift is designed to make writing and maintaining correct programs simple for developers.
```

Author: good catch!

**Swift on Server** refers to the ability to use the Swift programming language for server-side development. To deploy Swift applications on the server, developers can make use of web frameworks such as [Vapor](https://vapor.codes/) and [Hummingbird](https://swiftpackageindex.com/hummingbird-project/hummingbird) which provide a variety of tools and libraries to streamline the development process. These frameworks handle important aspects like routing, database integration, and request handling, allowing developers to focus on building the business logic of their applications.

> Various companies and organizations have adopted Vapor and Hummingbird's server-side Swift web framework to power their production services.

Reviewer: Tighten up the language here
```suggestion
Various companies and organizations have adopted Vapor and Hummingbird to power their production services.
```

Author: LGTM

Swift on Server is also used to power high-performance production services like [Amazon Prime Video](https://www.amazon.com/b/?node=2858778011).

## Why Swift on Server?

Swift on Server provides developers with a modern, safe, and efficient option for writing server-side code. Swift combines the simplicity and readability of a high-level language with the performance and safety features of a compiled language, allowing developers to leverage their existing Swift skills to build complete end-to-end solutions using a single programming language.

In addition to the characteristics of Swift that make it an excellent general-purpose programming language, it also has unique characteristics that make it specifically suitable for server applications due to its:

- Performance
- Quick start-up time
- Expressiveness and safety
- Supported ecosystem

### Performance

> Swift offers fast performance, a low memory footprint, and quick startup. Instead of tracing garbage collection, it uses [Automatic Reference Counting (ARC)](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/automaticreferencecounting/) and ownership features, which allows precise control over resources.

Reviewer: Quick start up here feels a bit redundant as there's a whole section on it so I feel we should remove it from here

Reviewer: I'd like to expand on why ARC is so much better in terms of deterministic performance - there's a section from the old page we could use

Reviewer: We should also re-emphasise the memory footprint since it's orders of magnitude better than other languages like Java - the small footprint section from the original could be a good fit

Author: @0xTim - I revised this section as suggested. Ptal and lmk if you have further changes. Thanks!

> Swift’s performance is comparable to languages like C++ and Objective-C, making it well-suited for building high-performance server applications. Thanks to the modern and efficient design of the language, Swift server-side applications can handle large-scale workloads with high performance and low resource consumption.

Reviewer: I feel like it would be good to reference a language here that's used for server-side development as a comparison as that's what the people coming to the page will be used to

Author: @0xTim - Do you have a language in mind that would make for a good comparison?

Reviewer: Java, PHP, Python, JavaScript are all popular languages that Swift has a large advantage over. Any/all of those to reference

Author: added. thanks!

These characteristics make Swift ideal for using modern cloud platforms when maximizing resource utilization is needed.

### Quick start-up time

> Swift-based applications quickly start since there are almost no warm-up operations, making Swift a fit for cloud services, which are often rescheduled onto new virtual machines (VMs) or containers to address platform formation changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swift-based applications quickly start since there are almost no warm-up operations, making Swift an ideal fit for cloud services, which are often rescheduled onto new virtual machines (VMs) or containers to address platform formation changes.
```

Author: LGTM

> - Quick boot times make Swift ideal for serverless applications such as [Google Cloud Functions](https://cloud.google.com/functions#) or [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/) with negligible cold start times. Additionally, the quick start-up time and low memory advantages make Swift a good choice for micro services that scale in the cloud.

Reviewer: This list should have a sentence to run into it otherwise it comes a bit out of nowhere

Reviewer: We could expand on this point - Lamba and Cloud functions charge per MB and per ms - both of which Swift excel at making it a very good selling point

Author: @0xTim - Made revisions as suggested. Plmk if you have further changes.

- Using Swift helps streamline continuous delivery pipelines, incurring less wait time for new versions of the service fleet to go online.
- Swift allows you to rapidly respond to the need to scale-up where services are able to dynamically adjust their number of instances.

### Expressive and safe

> Swift enforces strong-typing, optionals, and memory safety features that help prevent common programming errors and improve code reliability. Swift on the server also benefits from the robust type-safety and memory-safety features of the language, which make it less prone to crashes and security vulnerabilities.

Reviewer: "memory safety" and "memory-safety" - we should make it consistent with "memory safety". Additionally having it duplicated is off - the second sentence's use of "also" either needs reworking or we should remove the memory safety part

Author: good catch! will rework.

Author: done

> Swift provides [built-in support for concurrency](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/concurrency/), allowing developers to write scalable and responsive server applications. Additionally, Swift’s concurrency model makes it a suitable choice for developing highly-concurrent server applications.

Reviewer: Sendable is a game changer for data safety and should definitely be mentioned

Author: @0xTim - added some language for the "sendable" attribute. Ptal and lmk what you think. Thanks again!

Various companies and organizations have adopted Vapor and Hummingbird to power their production services.

## Why Swift on Server?

Swift on Server provides developers with a modern, safe, and efficient option for writing server-side code. Swift combines the simplicity and readability of a high-level language with the performance and safety features of a compiled language, allowing developers to leverage their existing Swift skills to build complete end-to-end solutions using a single programming language.

In addition to the characteristics of Swift that make it an excellent general-purpose programming language, it also has unique characteristics that make it specifically suitable for server applications due to its:

- Performance
- Quick start-up time
- Expressiveness and safety
- Supported ecosystem

### Performance

> Swift offers fast performance and a low memory footprint. Instead of tracing garbage collection, it uses [Automatic Reference Counting (ARC)](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/automaticreferencecounting/) and ownership features, which allows precise control over resources. Swift’s use of ARC and its lack of just-in-time (JIT) compilation provides an edge in the cloud services space. The absence of JIT means no runtime optimization or de-optimization. 

Reviewer 2: I would remove that
```suggestion
Swift offers fast performance and a low memory footprint. Instead of tracing garbage collection, it uses [Automatic Reference Counting (ARC)](https://docs.swift.org/swift-book/documentation/the-swift-programming-language/automaticreferencecounting/) and ownership features, which allows precise control over resources. Swift’s use of ARC and its lack of just-in-time (JIT) compilation provides an edge in the cloud services space.
```

Author: sgtm. thanks

While tracing garbage collection technologies have improved, they still compete with the application for resources, triggering non-deterministic performance. Debugging non-deterministic performance and language-induced non-deterministic performance can confuse and mask application-level performance issues that can otherwise be addressed.

One of the main goals of a modern cloud platform is to maximize resource utilization by efficiently packing services into a single machine. Cloud services built with Swift have a small memory footprint (measured in MB), especially compared to other popular server languages with automatic memory management. Services built with Swift are also CPU-efficient, given the language’s focus on performance.

> While Java, PHP, Python, and JavaScript have their strengths and use cases, Swift offers several advantages over other programming languages. For example, Swift’s performance is comparable to languages like C++ and Objective-C, making it well-suited for building high-performance server applications. Thanks to the progressive and efficient design of the language, Swift server-side applications can handle large-scale workloads with high performance and low resource consumption.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While Java, PHP, Python, and JavaScript have their strengths and use cases, Swift offers several advantages over other programming languages. For example, Swift’s performance is comparable to languages like C and C++, making it well-suited for building high-performance server applications. Thanks to the progressive and efficient design of the language, Swift server-side applications can handle large-scale workloads with high performance and low resource consumption.
```

Author: lgtm.

> These characteristics make Swift ideal for using modern cloud platforms when maximizing resource utilization is needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These characteristics make Swift ideal for use in modern cloud platforms when maximizing resource utilization is needed.
```

### Quick start-up time
Swift-based applications quickly start since there are almost no warm-up operations, making Swift an ideal fit for cloud services, which are often rescheduled onto new virtual machines (VMs) or containers to address platform formation changes. Other considerations include:

- Quick boot times make Swift ideal for serverless applications such as [Google Cloud Functions](https://cloud.google.com/functions#) or [AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/) with negligible cold start times. Additionally, the quick start-up time and low memory advantages make Swift a good choice for microservices that scale in the cloud. 
- Using Swift helps streamline continuous delivery pipelines, incurring less wait time for new versions of the service fleet to go online.
- Swift allows you to rapidly respond to the need to scale up where services can dynamically adjust their number of instances.

> Note: Because Swift is an open-source object storage system, it does not charge for services (directly) like a cloud provider. However, underlying infrastructures like Google Cloud and AWS Lambda, on which Swift runs, may have associated costs.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't belong here
```suggestion
```

### Expressive and safe
Swift enforces type-safety, optionals, and memory safety features that help prevent common programming errors and improve code reliability. Swift on Server benefits from these robust language features, making it less prone to crashes and security vulnerabilities.

Swift provides [built-in support for concurrency](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/concurrency/), allowing developers to write scalable and responsive server applications. Swift’s concurrency model makes it suitable for developing highly concurrent server applications.

Swift's concurrency model introduces new language features and constructs to make it easier and safer to write concurrent code. The **Sendable** attribute is used to annotate types that are known to be safe to pass between tasks. By designating a type as Sendable, Swift ensures that it is safe to share and access that type across multiple concurrent tasks without causing data corruption or synchronization issues. This helps to prevent common concurrency problems, such as race conditions or access to stale data.

> The Sendable attribute is particularly useful in the context of Swift on the server, where concurrency and parallelism are frequently utilized. It provides a way to declare and enforce the safety of data accessed by multiple tasks simultaneously, helping to avoid data corruption and maintain data integrity. However, it's important to note that while Sendable helps ensure data safety within the context of Swift's concurrency model, it does not provide guarantees about the broader aspects of data safety, such as durability, consistency, or fault tolerance. Data safety in terms of resilience and durability of storage is typically handled through other mechanisms and configurations in Swift, such as data replication and redundancy.

Reviewer 2: I would drop this part
```suggestion
The Sendable attribute is particularly useful in the context of Swift on the server, where concurrency and parallelism are frequently utilized. It provides a way to declare and enforce the safety of data accessed by multiple tasks simultaneously, helping to avoid data corruption and maintain data integrity.
```

Author: SGTM, I Wasn't sure how much was too much. Thanks!

### Supported ecosystem

> Apple develops the Swift language, development environment, and library ecosystem. The Swift on Server ecosystem is growing, with the availability of frameworks, libraries, and tools specifically designed for server-side development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Swift ecosystem contains many useful libraries and tools specifically designed for server-side development.
```

Author: Thanks for the scrub.

> Overall, Swift on Server opens up new opportunities for developers to build fast, scalable, and secure backend services. Swift's combination of performance, readability, interoperability, safety, and modern language features make it a compelling choice for many developers, particularly for Apple platform development.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Overall, Swift on Server opens up new opportunities for developers to build fast, scalable, and secure backend services. Swift's combination of performance, readability, interoperability, safety, and modern language features make it a compelling choice for many developers.
```

Author: lgtm ... thanks

> Developers unfamiliar with Swift may want to [start with the basics](https://developer.apple.com/swift/).

Reviewer 2: Let's remove this
```suggestion
```

Author: sgtm.
